
node-heap-dump
==============

Overview
--------

This is a collection of programs for creating and viewing Node heap dumps using
V8 snapshots.  This was an experiment to see what run-time structures could be
viewed post-mortem using heap snapshots.

There are the following components:

- pmd.cc: add-on that provides one function, `takeSnapshot`, that takes a new
  heapsnapshot and serializes it as JSON to stdout (using the built-in V8
  mechanism for this).
- sample.js: simple script that uses the "pmd" add-on to generate a heap snapshot.
- heap-dump.js: a class called HeapDump that parses serialized heap snapshots.
  This is probably the component most likely to be useful for other projects
  because it parses the heap snapshot pretty generically.
- hdb.js: a program that takes a heap dump generated by the "pmd" add-on,
  parses it using heap-dump.js, and lets you summarize or explore the results.

The heap snapshot parser is pretty basic: it resolves references to strings,
type names, etc. but does *not* resolve references to other nodes.  This would
be easy to add as a second pass.

Note that the heap snapshot is a relatively compact representation; the
in-memory representation generated by this parser is substantially larger.


Setup: creating a snapshot
--------------------------

    # install dependencies
    npm install sprintf

    # build the add-on
    node-waf configure
    node-waf build
    node-waf install

    # generate a heap snapshot
    node sample.js > heapsnapshot

Example 1: summarize a snapshot
-------------------------------

    node hdb.js heapsnapshot text > heapsummary.txt

The result is a text file that resembles the snapshot but with various string
and type references resolved and presented in more human-readable form.


Example 2: explore a snapshot
-----------------------------

You can use "explore" to explore a snapshot.  It opens up a REPL with the
following functions:

- `node(num)`: return the node with index `num`.
- `findstr(str)`: return the node corresponding to the string `str`.
- `findrefs(num)`: return nodes referencing the node with index `num`.

For example:

    node hdb.js heapsnapshot explore
    > findstr('compost')
    { index: 503438,
      type: 'string',
      name: 'compost',
      children: [] }

    > findrefs(503438)
    [ { node: '40615',
        node_nchildren: 16385,
        node_name: '',
        type: 'hidden',
        name_or_index: 7722,
        to_node: 503438 },
      { node: '165335',
        node_nchildren: 6,
        node_name: 'Array',
        type: 'element',
        name_or_index: 0,
        to_node: 503438 },
      { node: '226953',
        node_nchildren: 6,
        node_name: 'Array',
        type: 'element',
        name_or_index: 0,
        to_node: 503438 },
      { node: '294910',
        node_nchildren: 3,
        node_name: '',
        type: 'hidden',
        name_or_index: 2,
        to_node: 503438 } ]

    > node(165335)
    { index: 165335,
      type: 'object',
      name: 'Array',
      children: 
       [ { type: 'element', name_or_index: 0, to_node: 503438 },
         { type: 'element', name_or_index: 1, to_node: 566310 },
         { type: 'property',
           name_or_index: '__proto__',
           to_node: 40475 },
         { type: 'hidden', name_or_index: 1, to_node: 248392 },
         { type: 'hidden', name_or_index: 2, to_node: 570782 },
         { type: 'hidden', name_or_index: 3, to_node: 294910 } ] }

Though it's not obvious if you haven't spent time looking at V8 heap dumps,
we've established that node 165335 is an array whose first element is the
string 'compost'.


Resources
---------

The snapshot format is documented in:

    node/deps/v8/include/v8-profiler.h

This discussion contains additional useful information:

    http://groups.google.com/group/google-chrome-developer-tools/browse_thread/thread/a5f86cb20fa1e9eb/?pli=1
